ADDON_SUMMARY add-on : change log 
Last Version : ADDON_CUR_VERSION - %%date(%m-%d-%y)
Authors : ADDON_AUTHOR_NAME

%!includeconf: ../addon_userManual.t2tconf
%!includeconf: addon_informations.t2tconf
%!includeconf: addon_keys.t2tconf

-br

URL : [RPTools.org https://www.rptools.org/Outils-DV/NVDA-ThunderbirdPlus-en.html]

GitHub repos: [ThunderbirdPlus repos ADDON_REPOSITORY] ;

Compatibility :
- Minimum supported NVDA  version  : MINIMUM_NVDA_VERSION
- Last tested NVDA version : LAST_TESTED_NVDA_VERSION


-br
=Table of contents=[toc]
%%toc


-br


=Change log=[histo]
==Version 4.5, 02-13-2023==
- Addon compatibility has been upgraded to NVDA 2023.1;
- Two new options in the -optMenu / Main window Option :
 - To complement the "Hide mailing list names" option, the "Edit words to be hidden in the subject of messages" command has been added. It allows you not to hear list names that are not surrounded by square brackets or "***" mentions, for example.
 - Edit the delay before the automatic reading of the separate message window. Alt+d: Depending on the speed of the computer, this playback may start too late or be cut off by another announcement. The default delay is set at 100 milliseconds, which is fine for a very fast PC; ;


==Version 4.4, 01-17-2023==
Many changes to make the addon  consistent with its publication on the gitHub repository.

[Visite ThunderbirdPlus repos on gitHub https://github.com/RPTools-org/ThunderbirdPlus]


==versions 4.3.3, January 8, 2023==
- After optimizations, reading headers no longer worked in the separate reading window ;
- When the selected NVDA language was "User Default", the extension's help file was not found when pressing Control+F1 ;


==versions 4.3.2, January 6, 2023==
Fix: reading headers in the separate window of a message no longer worked ;


==versions 4.3.1, January 4, 2023==
After the translation into three languages ​​of version 4.3, optimizations and fixes:

- The determination of the active window no longer depends on its title, which makes the extension less dependent on the Thunderbird interface language. If the interface language of NVDA is different from that of Thunderbird, the most important scripts of Thunderbird+ will work correctly;
- Internally, the search speeds of certain objects have been accelerated: this has an impact on the determination of the active tab and on the navigation between the panes of the main window;
- The shortcut control+R to reply to a message did not work when the preview pane was not displayed and SmartReply was activated;
- Reactivating automatic updates via the options menu no longer worked following a previous change;


==versions 4.3, 12/26/2022==
- First localization of Thunderbird+4 in a foreign language: in Portuguese by Rui Fontes from TifloTecnia.com and Ângelo Miguel Abrantes, NVDA Portugal team members ; Thanks to them for opening the door to other languages;
- Translation in Spanish by Remy Ruiz ;
- Translation in English from French by Google Translate & Pierre-Louis R. ;
-brImprovements of this translation are welcome.


Note: In order to the addon to work properly, the NVDA language must be the same as the Thunderbird user interface;


ions 4.2.7 for Thunderbird 102, 11/24/2022==

A new option has been added to the -optMenu / Options menu for the main window:
- separate reading window: do not automatically read the mmessage if it causes NVDA crashes
-brBy default, when you open a message by pressing Enter from the message list, a clean reading of the message starts when the new window opens. On some computers and when the email account is set to IMAP, NVDA may crash. When this option is checked, this automatic reading is deactivated to avoid any blocking.


==versions 4.2.5 for Thunderbird 102, 11/22/2022==
-brList of messages in bulk mode:

- The add-on first announces "Reduced" when arriving on a reduced level 1 line;- By pressing space, F4 or Alt+Down arrow for a clean reading of the preview pane message, such a line is first expanded. This is necessary to be able to retrieve the message to be read;


-brOpening the separate window for reading a message:
- The window title is no longer repeated 4 times, this problem also occurred without Thunderbird+.
-br Instead, the window title is announced once in a stripped down manner and is sustained from the stripped down reading of the message. Just press a key to stop this reading, the cursor will be at the beginning of the message.
-brThe title is stripped when the name of a mailing list appears several times, it will only be spoken once. Also, the name "Mozilla Thunderbird" is changed to "TB";
-brPlay starts after a delay of 100 milliseconds by default. If this delay is too short or too long depending on the speed of the computer, it can be adjusted via the shortcut Alt+d, d as delay.
-brThe input box is quite rudimentary, if you enter an unauthorized value, the box will close with a beep, you will have to press Alt+d again to enter another delay;
- Bug fix: when closing the window and returning to the message list, the escape key did not return to the tree structure;
-brStill in this specific context, the Space key does not allow uncluttered reading of the preview pane, use F4 or Alt+down arrow instead;


-brEdit window:
By pressing Alt+1 twice quickly, we reach the "From" addressing field. Now, the add-on automatically scrolls the list of your email accounts to allow its navigation with the vertical arrows. Previously, the down arrow from this field jumped directly to the "For" field;


-brMenu of options obtained by pressing -optMenu, addition of the 3 commands below:

- Save current configuration: copies the .ini file of the add-on into an .inibak file;
- Restore the saved configuration r: copies the .inibak file to the .INI file and reloads the parameters;
- Reset r configuration: reloads the default settings of the add-on. Beforehand, make a backup if one does not yet exist;



==versions 4.1 to 4.2.1 for Thunderbird 102, 07/11/2022==
Important Note: After installing this version, please check in the add-on manager if Thunderbird+4 is not installed twice. If necessary, delete the old version;
-br
-br
The main novelty of this version is its ability to work in duo with [Chichi àodvthunderbird-chichi.html] if it is installed. If not, the add-on continues to work as before.

It allows you to start Thunderbird on any folder you have defined by pressing the Applications key in the folder tree;

Combined with Thunderbird+,the following commands are available:

- Space, F4 and Alt+down arrow when double tapping on a message in the message list: opens the list of links contained in the message displayed in the preview pane. With a Single press, the message is always read by Thunderbird+;
- Space on a folder in the tree structure: if the folder contains unread messages, pressing selects the first unread message in the folder. If it doesn't, space opens the list of folders with unread messages. There, just press Enter on a folder to go to its first unread message. If you press Space in this list, the selected folder will be marked as read, without asking for confirmation;
- For other Chichi commands, read the section [Chichi Commands https://www.rptools.org/Outils-DV/thunderbird-chichi.html#toc6]


New options have been added to the -optMenu menu to allow you to disable certain features if you prefer to use their equivalent in Chichi. Note: at this time, Chichi does not yet offer an alternative to some of the features listed below.
-brDeactivations submenu for Chichi and Thunderbird+:
-brFolders: Space does not select the next unread message in the list and does not display the list of unread folders d: Chichi does not yet have a standalone equivalent;
-brFolders: no navigation by initials d: by activating this option, Chichi will be used. It only works top-down and does not speak the name of the account to which the activated folder belongs;
-brList messages: Space does not read the message from the preview pane l: if you check this option, Chichi will speak the message from the preview pane. Unlike Thunderbird+, this playback will not be sanitized. On the other hand, F4 and Alt+down arrow will continue to appeal to the uncluttered reading of Thunderbird+;
-brList messages: no SmartReply: disables the functionality which allows to reply to a mailing list with -ctrl+r in single press or to the sender with -ctrl+r in double press,
-brList messages: do not manage the quick filter bar: suppress access to filter options with the down arrow;
-br main window: Tab does not move to the next pane f
-brmain window: Escape does not return to the previous pane f

-br-br
Other new features:
-brNVDA+end: NVDA's status bar announcement has been reverted and improved. For the main window, if applicable, the number of filtered messages as well as the filtering expression are also announced. The Alt+end shortcut was retained because it spells out the filter keyword;
-br The -cmdMenu menu has two new entries:
- Chichi page: this page explains how to download and install Chichi and provides you with the description of its keyboard shortcuts;
- Join Thunderbird-dv:this brings up a page that tells you how to subscribe to the thunderbird-dv mailing list and tells you what other commands are available;


-brEdit window:
For addressing fields that are not shown by default, Copy To, Blind Copy To, and Reply To, Alt+number commands have been improved. For example, hitting Alt+4:
-brWith a press, you will hear: "The Copy to field is missing, type this command twice quickly to display it." ;
-brWith two presses, the Copy to field will be displayed and will take focus;
-br

-brFixes:

The r shortcut has been removed from the command gestures for the SmartReply function, it caused problems in write mode;

The part that transforms the lines of the list of messages has been rewritten in a different logic in order to overcome certain problems encountered in grouped mode by conversations or sort criteria;

Thunderbird startup management has been removed from the add-on in favor of Chichi or Start with inbox.
-brIf you continue to use the latter, it has just been upgraded to version 2.5.2. It now allows you to start Thunderbird on the first unread message in the Incoming Mail folder of the account you have chosen in its options;
-br
==+Versions 4.1.1 to 4.2.1==+

List of messages:
- when a quick filter is active, a WAV audio file is played when the list or the tab to which it belongs receives focus. The sound resembles a breath;
-brThe filter.wav file is located in the folder:
-br"%appdata%\NVDA\TB+sounds"
-brYou can place a sound there to your liking as long as your file is called: filter.wav. After this change, restart NVDA;
- Two New options in the menu -optMenu / Miscellaneous deactivations:
-br"Message list: Escape does not return to tree": option unchecked by default;
-br"Allow Thunderbird to close with -ctrl+w or -ctrl+F4": by enabling this option, these shortcuts will close Thunderbird when only one tab remains open;


Folder tree:
-brIf the selected folder has unread messages, pressing space selects the next or first unread message in the list:
- In the default configuration of Thunderbird+4, the next unread message will be selected, this one will not necessarily be the first unread message. This behavior is that of the n shortcut in Thunderbird;
- If the option "Space on a folder with unread searches for the first unread message from the beginning of the list of messages" of the Options menu for the main window is checked: contrary to the shortcut "n" of Thunderbird, the script will search the actual first unread message in the folder. On slower computers, this detour can be heard;


-brBy pressing Tab on the name of the account selected in the tree structure,we reach a frame containing several buttons relating to this account. From now on, the escape key allows you to return to the tree structure;

-brClean reading of messages:
-brF4 key now reads a message if it has focus, whether in the preview pane, reading tab, in the separate reading window, and even in the Write window.
With -shift+F4, the reading is done in the chronological order of the citations;
-br
-brGroups.io message footer, like on NVDA-FR: in clean read with space or f4, the whole message footer is silenced from the line of many equals;
-brLines with several dashes are now ignored, they no longer cause the continuation of the message to be deleted. This issue was caused by the removal of message footers from Yahoo listings;
-brIf message display is set to original HTML, stylesheets are no longer spoken;


==version 4.0.4 for Thunderbird 102, 09/24/2022==
1. Changes to the list of messages:

- When a mailing list name appears multiple times in a line, that name is now only announced once. Ditto for the announcement of the object with key 2 of the alphanumeric keyboard;
- The letter r typed alone no longer allows you to reply to a message, this caused problems in writing messages. The equivalent shortcuts are: -ctrl+r or Alt+page up. These shortcuts are always configurable in the control gestures configuration dialog under Thunderbird+4 / SmartReply;
- Fixed the problem of the announcement of level 2 lines when the list is grouped by sort criteria. This issue only occurred to some users;


2. New thunderbird-dv mailing list:

For more information and to subscribe, go to [thunderbird-dv http://rptools.org/thunderbird-dv.html];


==version 4.0.3 for Thunderbird 102, 09/03/2022==

Fixes following changes introduced in Thunderbird 102.2:

- This message: alert To protect your privacy, Thunderbird has blocked the display of remote content in this message, was announced even if the display of messages was set to simple HTML and the display of remote content was disabled in Thunderbird settings. From now on, the add-on completely removes this ad but without suppressing its display.
- Announcement of status bar information: the shortcut Alt+end no longer announced this information, just like NVDA with the shortcut NVDA+end. This works again with Alt+end;
- In the Message List, grouping lines are now announced in a more friendly way. in "Group messages by sorting criteria" mode: for example, for a list grouped by correspondents, you will hear for these special lines: Jean Dupont group, Tartempion group, etc.==version 4.0.2 for Thunderbird 102, 08/23/2022==
Fixed a hotkey conflict: -ctrl+Backspace when composing a message. This shortcut no longer closes the window;


==Modification of the instructions for use, 07/22/2022==
Significant revision to the section dealing with starting Thunderbird.
-brThe [Thunderbird startup enhancement #startup] section explains how to install and configure the "Auto select latest message" and "Start with inbox" add-ons
-brThese two modules integrate directly with Thunderbird, they are independent of NVDA.


==version 4.0.1 for Thunderbird 102, 07/20/2022==
- Menu -optMenu / Options for the Write window: added option "Enable improved Spell check while typing.". This option is disabled by default, which removes the last cause of potential slowness in typing a message. This spell check mode does not yet work in NVDA 2022.1;
- Command "Write to support" menu -cmdMenu: the automatic subject of the message indicates the version of Thunderbird+4 and that of Thunderbird that you are using. This allows me to check that the versions match, please use this channel when you need help;
- Fixed minor bugs;


==version 4.0 for Thunderbird 102, 02/07/2022==
This version follows version 3 which remains available in French only;